The secure storage and sharing of
research data is increasingly being
emphasized by research funders and
institutions.
The benefits of sharing research
data include enabling new discovery
using existing datasets,
exploring new collaborations,
the verification of results and
reducing duplication of research.
The FAIR data principles act as
an international guideline for
high-quality data stewardship.
FAIR is an acronym which makes the
concept easier to discuss,
and FAIR data refers to data which
meet principles of findability,
accessibility, interoperability
and reusability.
By itself, data has no inherent meaning.
For data to have meaning and be usable,
useful and valuable, it needs to
adhere to certain standards.
The FAIR data principles were first
specified in 2016 in a publication
by an international consortium of
researchers.
Without a set of guidelines like
the FAIR the world of research data
would become more siloed,
restrictive and inaccessible than
ever before.
The FAIR data principles guide
researchers in managing their data
and making it findable,
accessible, interoperable and reusable.
Using an established data repository
like UWC's institutional repository,
KeKapu, to store and share research
data goes a long way to ensure that
it is FAIR.
Making use of a repository like
KeKapu also increases the fairness
of the data because it requires
that data are richly described and
accompanied by supporting documentation.
UWC is also committed to data being
as open as possible and as closed
as necessary.
Open in order to foster reusability
and to accelerate research.
Closed to safeguard the privacy
of the subjects.
Ideally, all data should be supplied
in open formats where possible and
published openly, where legally
and ethically permissible.
The first step in reusing data is
to find them.
Metadata and data should be easy
to find for both humans and computers.
Machine-readable metadata are essential
for automatic discovery of datasets
and services, so this is an essential
component of the verification process.
For data to be findable,
metadata and metadata are assigned
a globally unique and persistent
identifier.
Data are described with rich metadata.
Metadata clearly and explicitly
include the identifier of the data
it describes.
Metadata and data are registered
or indexed in a searchable resource.
Once the required data have been found,
it needs to be clear how they can
be accessed, possibly including
authentication and authorization.
For data to be accessible,
metadata and data are retrievable
by the identifier using a standardized
communications protocol.
The protocol is open,
free and universally implementable
and the protocol allows for an
authentication and authorization
procedure where necessary.
Metadata are accessible even when
the data are no longer available.
The data usually need to be integrated
with other data.
In addition, the data need to
interoperate with applications or
workflows for analysis,
storage and processing.
For data to be interoperable,
metadata and data use a formal,
accessible, shared and broadly
applicable language for knowledge
representation.
Metadata and data use vocabularies
that follow FAIR principles.
Metadata and data include qualified
references to other metadata and data.
The ultimate goal of FAIR is to
optimize the reuse of data.
To achieve this, metadata and data
should be well described so that
they can be replicated and or combined
in different settings.
For data to be reusable,
metadata and data are richly described
with a plurality of accurate and
relevant attributes.
Metadata and data are released with
a clear and accessible data usage
license and they are associated
with detailed provenance.
Lastly, metadata and data meet domain
relevant community standards.
Importantly, FAIR data is not a
goal but a process.
Being committed to FAIR data requires
a paradigm shift from individuals
as well as hand-in-hand with FAIR
data compliance comes a commitment
from researchers to research data
management as well as data management
planning.